# Data Understanding

 - Data understanding encompasses all activities related to constructing the data set;
 - Essentially, the data understanding section of the data science methodology answers the question: Is the data that you collected representative of the problem to be solved?

**Case Study**

In order to understand the data related to congestive heart failure admissions, descriptive statistics needed to be run against the data columns that would become variables in the model. First, these statistics included hurst, univariates, and statistics on each variable, such as mean, median, minimum, maximum, and standard deviation. Second, pairwise correlations were used, to see how closely certain variables were related, and which ones, if any, were very highly correlated, meaning that they would be essentially redundant, thus making only one relevant for modeling. Third, histograms of the variables were examined to understand their distributions. Histograms are a good way to understand how values or a variable are distributed, and which sorts of data preparation may be needed to make the variable more useful in a model. For example, for a categorical variable that has too many distinct values to be informative in a model, the histogram would help them decide how to consolidate those values. The univariates, statistics, and histograms are also used to assess data quality. From the information provided, certain values can be re-coded or perhaps even dropped if necessary, such as when a certain variable has missing values. The question then becomes, does "missing" mean anything? Sometimes a missing value might mean "no", or "0" (zero), or at other times it simply means "we don't know" or, if a variable contains invalid or misleading values, such as a numeric variable called "age" that contains 0 to 100 and also 999, where that "triple-9" actually means "missing", but would be treated as a valid value unless we corrected it. Initially, the meaning of congestive heart failure admission was decided on the basis of a primary diagnosis of congestive heart failure. But working through the data understanding stage revealed that the initial definition was not capturing all of the congestive heart failure admissions that were expected, based on clinical experience. This meant looping back to the data collection stage and adding secondary and tertiary diagnoses, and building a more comprehensive definition of congestive heart failure admission. This is just one example of the interactive processes in the methodology. The more one works with the problem and the data, the more one learns and therefore the more refinement that can be done within the model, ultimately leading to a better solution to the problem.

# Data Preparation Concepts

 - Together with data collection and data understanding, data preparation is the most time-consuming phase of a data science project, typically taking 70% and even up to even 90% of the overall project time;
 - While this phase may take a while to do, if done right the results will support the project;
 - Automating some of the data collection and preparation processes in the database, can reduce this time to as little as 50%;
 - This time savings translates into increased time for data scientists to focus on creating models;
 - Feature engineering, the process of using domain knowledge of the data to create features that make the machine learning algorithms work, is also part of data preparation;
 - Feature engineering is critical when machine learning tools are being applied to analyze the data;

**Case Study**

In the case study, an important first step in the data preparation stage was to actually define congestive heart failure. This sounded easy at first but defining it precisely, was not straightforward. First, the set of diagnosis-related group codes needed to be identified, as congestive heart failure implies certain kinds of fluid buildup. We also needed to consider that congestive heart failure is only one type of heart failure. Clinical guidance was needed to get the right codes for congestive heart failure. The next step involved defining the re-admission criteria for the same condition. The timing of events needed to be evaluated in order to define whether a particular congestive heart failure admission was an initial event, which is called an index admission, or a congestive heart failure-related re-admission. Based on clinical expertise, a time period of 30 days was set as the window for readmission relevant for congestive heart failure patients, following the discharge from the initial admission. Next, the records that were in transactional format were aggregated, meaning that the data included multiple records for each patient.Transactional records included professional provider facility claims submitted for physician, laboratory, hospital, and clinical services. Also included were records describing all the diagnoses, procedures, prescriptions, and other information about in-patients and out-patients. A given patient could easily have hundreds or even thousands of these records, depending on their clinical history. Then, all the transactional records were aggregated to the patient level, yielding a single record for each patient, as required for the decision-tree classification method that would be used for modeling. As part of the aggregation process, many new columns were created representing the information in the transactions. For example, frequency and most recent visits to doctors, clinics and hospitals with diagnoses, procedures, prescriptions, and so forth. Co-morbidities with congestive heart failure were also considered, such as diabetes, hypertension, and many other diseases and chronic conditions that could impact the risk of re-admission for congestive heart failure. During discussions around data preparation, a literary review on congestive heart failure was also undertaken to see whether any important data elements were overlooked, such as co-morbidities that had not yet been accounted for. The literary review involved looping back to the data collection stage to add a few more indicators for conditions and procedures. Aggregating the transactional data at the patient level, meant merging it with the other patient data, including their demographic information, such as age, gender, type of insurance, and so forth. The result was the creation of one table containing a single record per patient, with many columns representing the attributes about the patient in his or her clinical history. These columns would be used as variables in the predictive modeling. The data preparation stage resulted in a cohort of 2,343 patients meeting all of the criteria for this case study. The cohort was then split into training and testing sets for building and validating the model, respectively.

# Summary

 - The Data Understanding stage encompasses all activities related to constructing the data set and answers the question as to whether the data you collected represents the problem to be solved;
 - During the Data Understanding stage, scientists might use descriptive statistics, predictive statistics, or both;
 - Data scientists commonly apply Hurst, univariates, and other statistics on each variable, such as mean, median, minimum, maximum, standard deviation, pairwise correlation, and histograms;

# Glossary

| Term | Definition |
|------|------------|
| Feature | A characteristic or attribute within the data that helps in solving the problem |
| Feature Engineering | The process of creating new features or variables based on domain knowledge to improve machine learning algorithms' performance |
| Feature Extraction | Identifying and selecting relevant features or attributes from the data set |
| Interactive Processes | Iterative and continuous refinement of the methodology based on insights and feedback from data analysis |